Sixty years ago this week, on 7 October 1955, Allen Ginsberg read Howl aloud for the first time, at the Six Gallery in San Francisco. It’s a poem with many anniversaries – Ginsberg began writing it in mid-1954, and it wasn’t published until 1956 – which may be why Hal Willner organised a 60th-anniversary celebration of it at the Ace hotel in Los Angeles in April of this year, with a lineup including Courtney Love, Beth Orton, Devendra Banhart, Nick Cave, Macy Gray and Peaches.

That lineup hints at just how Howl has permeated popular culture and, unlike almost any other piece of literature, helped shape music as it is today.

Ginsberg, interdisciplinary before many other artists, made many personal forays into music, from collaborating with Paul McCartney, Philip Glass and the Clash to his 1981 experimental Buddhist punk anthem, Birdbrain. If you look in the background of the famous film for Bob Dylan’s Subterranean Homesick Blues, you can spot him standing to the singer’s right.

Howl, though, was where it began, a hallucinatory tour-de-force that started the arms race between poetry and rock’n’roll. It terrorised civilised society in the 1950s – in 1957, a clerk at the City Lights bookstore in San Francisco was jailed for selling it, while City Lights’ publisher, Lawrence Ferlinghetti, was prosecuted – and acquitted – for publishing it.

Howl is about drugs, promiscuity, youth alienation, capitalism, industrialisation, expression, conformity, sexuality and the beauty of being in the gutter. It glows with an idiosyncratic interest in self-expression and the belief that the writer should refuse inhibition and self-censorship. It dismantled cultural mores and boundaries on a macro-cosmic level but also inspired a new wave of musicians through style, metre and imagery.


Ellen Willis, in her 1967 essay Before the Flood, wrote that Dylan’s A Hard Rain’s A-Gonna Fall, from his second album, owed much to Ginsberg’s “Biblical rhetoric and declamatory style” – but you could include much of his other work in the debt. Willis drew parallels between hippie culture – the bastard child of the Beat generation, born when the beats and the mid-60s San Francisco counterculture cross-fertilised – and folk culture. “Both movements rejected intellect for sensation, politics for art, and Ginsberg and Kerouac glorified a grassroots America that included supermarkets and cars as well as mountains and apple pie,” she wrote. Within Howl, there is a damning of authority, yes, but it lies with a celebration of human life that would provide nutrients for the next generations.

Cue Patti Smith, on whose work Ginsberg left an indelible mark. Music photographer Kevin Cummins, who photographed Ginsberg in Manchester in 1979, when the poet was feted by the punk establishment in England, suggests Smith’s 1974 debut Piss Factory wouldn’t have existed without Howl. “People didn’t write poetry like that. Piss Factory is a poem with a beat and nobody was doing that at the time,” he says. Cummins remembers how important the poem was for the artists he was mixing with, such as Joy Division, Morrissey and David Bowie. “It opened a world for us that we didn’t know as much about.”

Howl, and Judge Clayton Horn – the man who dismissed the case against Ferlinghetti and ruled the poem was of “redeeming social importance” – set a new world in motion, where musicians could express their sexuality without checking themselves for Victorian notions of decency. It was a rocket up the backside of conformity and censorship, allowing talk of cock and balls and cunt and semen without shame or blush: in New York, the Fugs took the lesson to heart, and Ginsberg returned the favour, writing the liner notes for their second album in 1966.


The musician Peaches is more forthright. Howl “started a revolution”, she says. “To be so brave and so open about the situation in America and homosexuality while using a style of writing which was almost a stream of consciousness that was confusing to people was completely powerful.”

But Ginsberg needed to be encouraged: Howl’s delight in visceral human urges and saying the things that weren’t supposed to be said came after he was instructed by Ferlinghetti to “speak from the heart”.

“He wasn’t afraid of being human,” says David Wrench, producer for FKA Twigs, Jungle and Caribou. “There’s nothing to be ashamed of. It’s all celebratory.”

Wrench has observed the poem’s constant presence among younger bands. “Bands often have books in the studio and Howl is there all the time. Maybe with some Blake or Plath. It keeps coming back because it inspires people.”

Even if a musician hasn’t heard Howl, they’re part of its ecosystem, because it’s one of the building blocks of modern rock’n’roll: you may not have been influenced by Howl, but you’ve been influenced by something it influences. “It’s a bit like Smells Like Teen Spirit,” says Catherine Anne Davies, who records and performs as the Anchoress. “We forget how amazing it is and how at the time it would have been so shocking.”

The nuts and bolts of Howl matter, as well as the social impact. Like Patti Smith and Dylan before her, Davies draws on Ginsberg’s verbal techniques. “I’m acutely attuned to metre and line and how Howl is about spontaneous and improvised expression; the composition seeps into my work,” she says.

Devendra Banhart … celebrating 60th anniversary.
 Devendra Banhart … celebrating the 60th anniversary. Photograph: Matthew Eisman/WireImage
Ginsberg played around with words, using them to create the chassis of the poem, the first section of which is built on the word “who”. “I depended on the word ‘who’ to keep the beat, a base to keep measure, return to and take off from again onto another streak of invention,” he wrote in 1959.

Devendra Banhart grew up in California in the 90s and remembers Howl turning him on to poetry. “It was the first time I read a poem that made me sweat, the first time that I read a poem that meant I couldn’t speak. I hit my head. This is the power. Here’s a living, profound experience in words.”

It was the gateway for Banhart’s interest in Buddhism, too; and Ginsberg was a gateway for generations of western musicians to explore eastern religions, which swept into rock music a whole new realm of spirituality and mysticism.

But 60 years after it was first performed, is it still relevant? “It didn’t sound in the least bit dated,” Banhart says. “Allen is writing about injustice and there’s still injustice; he’s writing about liberation, there’s still the need for liberation; he’s writing about the thirst for peace, freedom, revolution, all of those things are still a prominent concern of our times. If anything, they’ve been magnified. Howl doesn’t have an expiration date.”
