Britain’s record of low unemployment acted as magnet for European Union migrants last year, sending the total number of workers from the other 27 EU nations in the UK above 2 million for the first time.

Employment figures covering the three months to December show that the number of non-UK EU nationals working in Britain rose to 2.04 million.

Over the previous year, 278,000 UK workers found a job, taking the total number in work to 28.28 million, while the total number of non-UK nationals working in Britain increased by 254,000 to 3.22 million.

The figures are likely to put pressure on David Cameron as he battles to restrict the access to some in-work benefits to UK nationals during his negotiations with EU leaders.

The Tory party and some economists believe the lure of tax credits and child benefit, which act as a top-up for lower wage jobs, has encouraged a wave of migrant workers into minimum-wage service industry jobs.


However, research by the National Institute of Economic and Social Research has shown that a cut in the number of migrants would have a negative impact on the economy.

The figures from the Office for National Statistics published on Wednesday showed that wages growth lost momentum in December for an eighth straight month.

Analysts said the drop in the annual wages growth rate to 1.9% indicated that a first UK interest rate rise since the financial crash would be even further away than expected.

The Bank of England has highlighted the decline in wages growth as one of the main reasons for keeping the base rate at 0.5%.

Until the start of the new year policymakers at the Bank were expected to raise rates by the summer or autumn at the latest, but a delay is now likely until at least the spring of 2017.

The unemployment rate also disappointed the City after it failed to fall from 5.1% to 5% as expected following a 60,000 fall to 1.69 million unemployed people between October and December compared with the previous three months.


Striking a more optimistic note, the ONS figures showed there was an increase in the number of people in work to a record high of 31.42 million and wages excluding bonuses rose slightly to 2% from 1.9%.

Howard Archer, chief economist at IHS Global Insight, said the slowdown could be seen in the increase in employment by 205,000 in the three months to December, much less than the 267,000 gain in the three months to November.

He said: “While the jobs data look solid, there are some signs that employment growth could be starting to lose momentum. Some easing back in underlying employment growth was likely the consequence of the UK recently finding growth more difficult and companies finding it hard to get the qualified/skilled workers they need.”

Another factor limiting employment growth would come from those companies looking to lift the productivity of their workers in the face of the forthcoming introduction of the “national living wage” from April 2016, he said.

John Philpott, director of The Jobs Economist, said the rise in employment was split roughly equally between employees and self-employed people, 88,000 of the rise based on previously economically inactive people entering the labour market.

“Despite the good news on jobs this suggests deterioration in an already dire underlying productivity performance and in part helps explain why average weekly earnings excluding bonuses are still rising at an annual rate of only 2%.

“For the time being low consumer price inflation is protecting workers from the consequences of weakness in UK productivity and pay but we face a rude awakening on jobs and living standards if and when prices start to rise again and/or if economic growth slows sharply.”

Inflation stood 0.2% in December, before increasing to 0.3% in January, providing a 1.8% cushion with annual wage rises.

Dennis de Jong, managing director at currency dealer UFX.com, said this gap made him more upbeat about the prospects for employment.

“The unemployment rate remains at its lowest level in almost a decade and wage growth, excluding bonuses, has ticked up.

“Chancellor George Osborne will be hoping that the introduction of the national living wage in April will see pay increase and help inflation rise further.”

Osborne said: “In the face of significant turbulence in the global economy, it is encouraging that more people than ever have the security of a job and a rising pay packet.

“With a record number of people in work and unemployment and youth unemployment reaching 10-year lows, this is further evidence of the need to stick to the government’s long term plan to deliver economic security against the cocktail of risks affecting the world.” 
